---
title: 一阶逻辑
---

## 前置

- [[数理逻辑/命题逻辑演算]]

## 定义

```
一阶语言的量词只作用到变量上。
二阶语言的量词可作用到变量和谓词上。
```

- **Symbols of first-order language** $\mathscr{L}$(一阶语言的符号集):
  - **Variables**: $x_1, x_2, \cdots$
  - **Individual constants**: $a_1, a_2, \cdots$
  - **Predicate letters**: $A^1_1, A^1_2, \cdots, A^2_1, A^2_2, \cdots$
  - **Function letters**: $f^1_1, f^1_2, \cdots, f^2_1, f^2_2, \cdots$
  - **Punctuation**: $(,),,$
  - **Connectives**: $\neg$, $\rightarrow$
  - **Quantifier**: $\forall$
- **Term** in $\mathscr{L}$:
  1. Variables and individual constants are terms.
  2. If $f^n$ is an $n$-ary function letter in $\mathscr{L}$ and $t_1,\dots,t_n$ are terms in $\mathscr{L}$, then $f^n(t_1,\dots,t_n)$ is a term in $\mathscr{L}$.
  3. The set of all terms is generated as in (1) and (2).
- **Atomic formula**(原子公式):
  - If $A^k$ is a $k$-ary predicate letter in $\mathscr{L}$ and $t_1,\dots,t_k$ are terms in $\mathscr{L}$, then $A^k(t_1,\dots,t_k)$ is an atomic formula in $\mathscr{L}$.
- **Well-formed formula**(wfs)(良形公式):
  1. Each atomic formula is a wfs.
  2. If $\mathscr{A}$ and $\mathscr{B}$ are wfs in $\mathscr{L}$, then $(\neg\mathscr{A})$, $(\mathscr{A}\to\mathscr{B})$, $(\forall x_i)\mathscr{A}$ are wfs in $\mathscr{L}$, where $x_i$ is an arbitrary variable.
  3. All wfs are generated as in (1) and (2).

- In the wf. $(\forall x_i)\mathscr{A}$, we say that $\mathscr{A}$ is the **scope** of the quantifier. More generally, when $(\forall x_i)\mathscr{A}$ occurs as a subformula of a wf. $\mathscr{B}$, we say that the scope of this quantifier in $\mathscr{B}$ is $\mathscr{A}$.
- An occurrence of the variable $x_i$ in a wf. is said to be **bound** if it occurs within the scope of a $(\forall x_i)$ in the wf., or if it is the $x_i$ in a $(\forall x_i)$.
- If an occurrence of a variable is not bound it is said to be **free**.

- An **interpretation** $I$ of $\mathscr{L}$ is a non-empty set $D_{I}$ (the **domain** of $I$) together with
  - a collection of distinguished elements $(\bar a_1,\bar a_2,\dots)$,
  - a collection of functions on $D_{I}$ $(\bar f_i^n,\ i>0,\ n>0)$,
  - a collection of relations on $D_{I}$ $(\bar A_i^n,\ i>0,\ n>0)$.
- A **valuation** in $I$ is a function $v\colon \{\text{terms of } \mathscr{L}\} \to D_{I}$
  with the properties:
  1. $v(a_i)=\bar a_i$ for each individual constant $a_i$ of $\mathcal{L}$.
  2. $v\bigl(f^n(t_1,\dots,t_n)\bigr)=\bar f^n\!\bigl(v(t_1),\dots,v(t_n)\bigr)$, where $f^n$ is any function letter in $\mathcal{L}$ and $t_1,\dots,t_n$ are any terms of $\mathcal{L}$.

```
Interpretation只提供变量的变化范围，常量的取值，然后给出函数和关系的具体含义。
即Interpretation把一个合式公式限制成一阶的，只剩下变量可以在$D_{I}$中变化。
Valuation只给term赋值。即给变量赋值。
```

- Two valuations $v$ and $v'$ are **i-equivalent** (i-等价, 记作$v\overset{i}{\sim} v'$) if $v(x_j) = v'(x_j)$ for every $j\not=i$.

- Let $\mathscr{A}$ be a wf. of $\mathscr{L}$ and let $I$ be an interpretation of $\mathscr{L}$. A valuation $v$ in $I$ is said to **satisfy** $\mathscr{A}$, if it can be shown inductively under the following four conditions:
  1. **Atomic case**  
     $v$ satisfies $A^k(t_1,\dots,t_k)$ iff the relation

     $$
     \bar A^k\!\bigl(v(t_1),\dots,v(t_k)\bigr)
     $$

     holds (is true) in $D_{\mathcal{I}}$.

  2. **Negation**  
     $v$ satisfies $(\neg\mathscr{A})$ iff $v$ **does not** satisfy $\mathscr{A}$.

  3. **Implication**  
     $v$ satisfies $(\mathscr{A}\to\mathscr{B})$ iff either
     - $v$ satisfies $(\neg\mathscr{A})$, **or**
     - $v$ satisfies $\mathscr{B}$.

  4. **Universal quantification**  
     $v$ satisfies $(\forall x_i)\mathscr{A}$ iff **every** valuation $v'$ that is **$i$-equivalent** to $v$ satisfies $\mathscr{A}$.  
     (Two valuations are $i$-equivalent when they agree on all variables except possibly $x_i$.)

- A wf. $\mathscr{A}$ is **true** in an interpretation $I$ if every valuation in $I$ satisfies $\mathscr{A}$.
- A wf. $\mathscr{A}$ is **false** in an interpretation $I$ if there is no valuation in $I$ which satisfies $\mathscr{A}$.

- We write $I \vDash \mathscr{A}$ if $\mathscr{A}$ is true in $I$. This is read as "$I$ satisfies $\mathscr{A}$".

- Thus if we take a wf. $\mathscr{A}_0$ of $\mathscr{L}_0$ and replace each statement letter occurring by a wf. of $\mathscr{L}$ (replacing the same letter by the same wf. throughout), we shall obtain a wf. $\mathscr{B}$ of $\mathscr{L}$. $\mathscr{B}$ is called a **substitution instance** in $\mathscr{L}$ of $\mathscr{A}_0$.
- A wf. $\mathscr{A}$ of $\mathscr{L}$ is a **tautology** if it is a substitution instance in $\mathscr{L}$ of a tautology in $\mathscr{L}_0$.
- A wf. $\mathscr{A}$ of $\mathscr{L}$ is said to be **closed** if no variable occurs free in $\mathscr{A}$.
- A wf. $\mathscr{A}$ of $\mathscr{L}$ is **logically valid** if $\mathscr{A}$ is true in every interpretation of $\mathscr{L}$.
- A wf. $\mathscr{A}$ of $\mathscr{L}$ is **contradictory** if $\mathscr{A}$ is false in every interpretation of $\mathscr{L}$.

## 性质

1. Substitution Lemma (Valuation Version) Let $\mathscr{A}(x_i)$ be a well-formed formula in which the variable $x_i$ occurs **free**, $t$ be a **term free for** $x_i$ in $\mathscr{A}(x_i)$, $v$ be any valuation in the given interpretation $I$, $v'$ be the valuation that is **$i$-equivalent** to $v$ and satisfies$v'(x_i)=v(t).$
   Then $v$ satisfies $\mathscr{A}(t)$ iff $v'$ satisfies $\mathscr{A}(x_i).$
2. If, in a particular interpretation $I$, the wfs. $\mathscr{A}$ and $\mathscr{A}\to\mathscr{B}$ is true, then $\mathscr{B}$ is true in $I$.
3. Let $\mathscr{A}$ be a wf. of $\mathscr{L}$, and let $I$ be an interpretation of $\mathscr{L}$. Then $I \vDash \mathscr{A}$ if and only if $I \vDash (\forall x_i)\mathscr{A}$, where $x_i$ is any variable.
4. Let $y_1,y_2, \cdots, y_n$, be variables in $\mathscr{L}$, let $\mathscr{A}$ be a wfs. of $\mathscr{L}$, and let $I$ be aninterpretation. Then $I \vDash A$ if and only if $I \vDash \forall y_1 \forall y_2 \cdots \forall y_n \mathscr{A}$ .
5. In an interpretation $I$, a valuation $v$ satisfies the formula $\exists x_i \mathscr{A}$ if and only if there is at least one valuation $v'$ which is i-equivalent to $v$ and which satisfies $\mathscr{A}$ .
6. A wf. $\mathscr{A}$ of $\mathscr{L}$ which is a tautology is true in any interpretation of $\mathscr{L}$
7. Let $I$ be an interpretation of $\mathscr{L}$ and let $\mathscr{A}$ be a wfs. of $\mathscr{L}$. If $v$ and $w$ are valuations such that $v(x_i)=w(x_i)$ for every free variable $x_i$ of $\mathscr{A}$, then $v$ satisfies $\mathscr{A}$ if and only if $w$ satisfies $\mathscr{A}$.
8. If $\mathscr{A}$ is a closed wf. of $\mathscr{L}$ and $I$ is an interpretation of $\mathscr{L}$, then either $I\vDash\mathscr{A}$ or $I\vDash(\neg\mathscr{A})$.
