---
title: 一阶逻辑演算
---

## 前置

- [[数理逻辑/一阶逻辑]]

## 定义

- Fix a first order language $\mathscr{L}$, Define a formal deductive system $K_{\mathscr{L}}$ (abbr. $K$) bythe following axioms and rules of deduction.

  - **Axioms**
    Let $\mathscr{A},\mathscr{B},\mathscr{C}$ be any wfs. of $\mathscr{L}$. The following are axioms of $K_{\mathscr{L}}$:

    - $K(1)$: $(\mathscr{A}\to(\mathscr{B}\to\mathscr{A}))$.
    - $K(2)$: $(\mathscr{A}\to(\mathscr{B}\to\mathscr{C}))\to((\mathscr{A}\to\mathscr{B})\to(\mathscr{A}\to\mathscr{C}))$.
    - $K(3)$: $(\neg\mathscr{A}\to\neg\mathscr{B})\to(\mathscr{B}\to\mathscr{A})$.
    - $K(4)$: $(\forall x_i)\mathscr{A}\to\mathscr{A}$, if $x_i$ does not occur free in $\mathscr{A}$.
    - $K(5)$: $(\forall x_i)\mathscr{A}(x_i)\to\mathscr{A}(t)$, if $\mathscr{A}(x_i)$ is a wf. of $K_{\mathscr{L}}$ and $t$ is a term in $\mathscr{L}$ which is free for $x_i$ in $\mathscr{A}(x_i)$.
    - $K(6)$: $(\forall x_i)(\mathscr{A}\to\mathscr{B})\to(\mathscr{A}\to(\forall x_i)\mathscr{B})$, if $\mathscr{A}$ contains no free occurrence of the variable $x_i$.

  - **Rules**
    - **Modus ponens**(MP): from $\mathscr{A}$ and $(\mathscr{A}\to\mathscr{B})$ deduce $\mathscr{B}$.
    - **Generalisation**: from $\mathscr{A}$ deduce $(\forall x_i)\mathscr{A}$, where $x_i$ is any variable.

- A **proof** in $K_\mathscr{L}$ is a sequence of wfs. $\mathscr{A}_1,\ \mathscr{A}_2,\ \dots,\ \mathscr{A}_n$ such that for each $i\ (1\le i\le n)$, either $\mathscr{A}_i$ is an axiom of $K_\mathscr{L}$ or $\mathscr{A}_i$ follows from previous members of the sequence by MP or Generalisation.
- If $\Gamma$ is a set of wfs. of $\mathscr{L}$, a **deduction from $\Gamma$ in $K_\mathscr{L}$** is a similar sequence, in which members of $\Gamma$ may be included.
- A wf. $\mathscr{A}$ is a **theorem of $K_\mathscr{L}$** if it is the last member of some sequence which constitutes a proof in $K_\mathscr{L}$.
- A wf. $\mathscr{A}$ is a **consequence in $K_\mathscr{L}$ of the set $\Gamma$ of wfs.** if $\mathscr{A}$ is the last member of a sequence which constitutes a deduction from $\Gamma$ in $K_\mathscr{L}$.
- Write$\vdash_{K_\mathscr{L}}\mathscr{A}$ to denote “$\mathscr{A}$ is a **theorem** of $K_\mathscr{L}$”, and $\Gamma\vdash_{K_\mathscr{L}}\mathscr{A}$ to denote “$\mathscr{A}$ is a **consequence** in $K_\mathscr{L}$ of $\Gamma$”, where $\Gamma$ is a set of wfs. of $K_\mathscr{L}$.
- For the sake of convenience we shall abbreviate $K_\mathscr{L}$ to $K$ unless there is reason to emphasise the particular language being used.
- Let $\mathscr{A}$ and $\mathscr{B}$ be wfs. of $L$. Say $\mathscr{A}$ and $\mathscr{B}$ are **provably equivalent** if $\vdash_{K}\mathscr{(A \leftrightarrow B)}$.
- If $\mathscr{A}$ is a wf. of containing free occurrences of the variables $y_1, \cdots, y_n$ only,
  then wf. $(\forall y_1) \cdots (\forall y_n) \mathscr{A}$ is the **universal closure** of $\mathscr{A}$.The universal closure of $\mathscr{A}$ is usually denoted by $\mathscr{A}'$.

## 性质

```mermaid
graph TD
A[Tautology] --> B[Logically Valid]
C[Theorem of K] --> B
```

1. If $\mathscr{A}$ is a wf. of $\mathscr{L}$ and $\mathscr{A}$ is tautology, then $\mathscr{A}$ is a theorem of $K_\mathscr{L}$.
2. All instances of axiom schemes (K4), (K5) and (K6) are logically valid.
3. **The Soundness Theorem for K**: For any wf. $\mathscr{A}$ of $\mathscr{L}$, if $\vdash_{K_\mathscr{L}} \mathscr{A}$ then $\mathscr{A}$ is logically valid.
4. **K is consistent** (i.e. for no wf. $\mathscr{A}$ are both $\mathscr{A}$ and $\neg \mathscr{A}$ theorems of K).
5. **The Deduction Theorem for $K$**:Let $\mathscr{A}$ and $\mathscr{B}$ be wfs. of $K$, and let $\Gamma$ be set (possibly empty) of wfs. of $K$. If $\Gamma\cup\{\mathscr{A}\}\vdash_{K}\mathscr{B}$, and the deduction contains no application of Generalisation involving a variable which occurs free in $\mathscr{A}$, then $\Gamma\vdash_{K}(\mathscr{A}\to \mathscr{B}).$
6. If $\Gamma\cup\{\mathscr{A}\}\vdash_{K}\mathscr{B},\text{and}\mathscr{A}\text{is a closed wf., then}\Gamma\vdash_{K}(\mathscr{A}\to \mathscr{B}).$
7. For any wfs. $\mathscr{A},\mathscr{B},\mathscr{C}$ of $K$, $(\mathscr{A}\to\mathscr{B}), (\mathscr{B}\to\mathscr{C}) \vdash_{K} (\mathscr{A}\to\mathscr{C}).$
8. For any wfs. $\mathscr{A} \text{ and } \mathscr{B} \text{ of } \mathscr{L}$, $\vdash_{K}\mathscr{(A \leftrightarrow B)}$ iff $\vdash_{K}\mathscr{(A \to B)}$ and $\vdash_{K}\mathscr{(B \to A)}.$
9. For any wfs. $\mathscr{A}, \mathscr{B}, \mathscr{C}$ in $\mathscr{L}$, if $\mathscr{A}$ and $\mathscr{B}$ are provably equivalent, $\mathscr{B}$ and $\mathscr{C}$ are provably equivalent, then $\mathscr{A}$ and $\mathscr{C}$ are provably equivalent.
10. If $x_i$ occur free in $\mathscr{A}(x_i)$ and $x_j$ is variable that not occur, free or bound, in $\mathscr{A}(x_i)$, then $\vdash_{K} (\forall x_i \mathscr{A}(x_i) \leftrightarrow \forall x_j \mathscr{A}(x_j))$.
11. If $\mathscr{A}$ is and wf. of $\mathscr{L}$, whose free variables are $y_1, y_2, \cdots, y_n$, then $\vdash_{K}(\forall y_1) (\forall y_2) \cdots (\forall y_n) \mathscr{A}$ iff $\vdash_{K}\mathscr{A}$.
12. $\vdash_{K}A'\to A$
13. Let $\mathscr{A}$ and $\mathscr{B}$ be wfs. of $\mathscr{L}$, and suppose that $\mathscr{B}_0$ arises from the wf. $\mathscr{A}_0$ by substituting $\mathscr{B}$ for one or more occurrences of $\mathscr{A}$ in $\mathscr{A}_0$. Then $\vdash_{K}\bigl((\mathscr{A}\leftrightarrow\mathscr{B})'\rightarrow(\mathscr{A}_0\leftrightarrow\mathscr{B}_0)\bigr)$.
14. If $x_j$ does not appear (free or bound) in the wf. $\mathscr{A}(x_i)$, and the wf. $\mathscr{B}_0$ arises from $\mathscr{A}_0$ by replacing one or more occurrences of $(\forall x_i)\mathscr{A}(x_i)$ by occurrences of $(\forall x_j)\mathscr{A}(x_j)$, then $\vdash_{K} (\mathscr{A}_0\leftrightarrow\mathscr{B}_0).$
