---
title: 命题逻辑演算
---

## 前置

- [[数理逻辑/命题逻辑]]

## 命题逻辑演算

- **Zero-order language**(零阶语言) $\mathscr{L}_0$:

  - **Alphabet**(字母表)(是countable的): $\{\neg,\rightarrow,(,)\}\cup\{p_i|i\in\mathbb{N}\}$
  - **The set of well-formed formulas**(良形公式)(wfs):
    - $p_i$ is a wfs
    - If $\mathscr{A}$ and $\mathscr{B}$ are wfs, then $\neg \mathscr{A}$ and $(\mathscr{A}\rightarrow \mathscr{B})$ are wfs
    - The set of all wfs generated by the above rules is called the set of wfs.

- **Formal system**(形式系统) $L$ of statement calculus(命题演算):
  - Zero-order language(零阶语言) $\mathscr{L}_0$:
  - **Axioms**(公理):
    - (L1) $(\mathscr{A}\to(\mathscr{B}\to\mathscr{A}))$
    - (L2) $(\mathscr{A}\to(\mathscr{B}\to\mathscr{C}))\to((\mathscr{A}\to\mathscr{B})\to(\mathscr{A}\to\mathscr{C}))$
    - (L3) $(\neg\mathscr{A}\to\neg\mathscr{B})\to(\mathscr{B}\to\mathscr{A})$
  - **Rules of reduction**(归约规则):
    - MP(modus ponens) Rules of deduction: from $\mathscr{A}$ and $(\mathscr{A}\to\mathscr{B})$, $\mathscr{B}$ is a direct consequence where $\mathscr{A}$ and $\mathscr{B}$ are wfs of $L$.
- **Proof**(证明): A proof in $L$ is a sequence of wfs. $\mathscr{A}_1,\mathscr{A}_2,\cdots,\mathscr{A}_n$ such that for each $i(1<i<n)$, either $\mathscr{A}_i$ is an axiom of $L$ or $\mathscr{A}_i$ follows from two previous members of the sequence, say $\mathscr{A}_j$ and $\mathscr{A}_k$ ($j<i, k<i$) as a direct consequence using the rule of deduction MP. Such a proof will be referred to as a proof of $\mathscr{A}_n$ in $L$, and $\mathscr{A}_n$ is said to be a **theorem** of $L$.
- **Deduction**(归约): let $\Gamma$ be a set of wfs. of $L$ (which may or may not be axioms or theorems of $L$). A sequence $\mathscr{A}_1,\mathscr{A}_2,\cdots,\mathscr{A}_n$ of wfs. of $L$ is a deduction from $\Gamma$ (记作$\Gamma\vdash_{L} \mathscr{A}_n$) if for each $i(1<i<n)$, one of the following holds:
  - $\mathscr{A}_i$ is an axiom of $L$
  - $\mathscr{A}_i$ is a member of $\Gamma$
  - $\mathscr{A}_i$ follows from two previous members of the sequence, say $\mathscr{A}_j$ and $\mathscr{A}_k$ ($j<i, k<i$) as a direct consequence using the rule of deduction MP.
- **Valuation**(赋值): A valuation of $L$ is a function $v$ whose domain is the set of wfs. of $L$ and whose range is the set $\{T, F\}$ such that, for any wfs. $\mathscr{A}, \mathscr{B}$ of $L$,
  - $v(\mathscr{A}) \not = v(\neg \mathscr{A})$
  - $v(\mathscr{A} \to \mathscr{B}) = F$ if and only if $v(\mathscr{A}) =T$ and $v(\mathscr{B}) = F$
- **Tautology**(重言式): A wf $\mathscr{A}$ is a tautology if $v(\mathscr{A}) = T$ for every valuation $v$ of $L$.
- **Extension**(扩张): An extension of $L$ is a formal system obtained by altering or enlarging the set of axioms so that all theorems of $L$ remain theorems (and new theorems are possibly introduced).
- **Consistent**(一致): A extension of $L$ is consistent if there is not exist a wf $\mathscr{A}$ of $L$ such that $\mathscr{A}$ and $\neg \mathscr{A}$ are both theorems of extension of $L$. 即对所有的 wf. $\mathscr{A}$ 都有 $\mathscr{A}$ 或 $\neg \mathscr{A}$ 不是 theorem of extension of $L$。
- **Complete**(完备): A extension of $L$ is complete if for every wf. $\mathscr{A}$ of $L$, either $\mathscr{A}$ or $\neg \mathscr{A}$ is a theorem of extension of $L$.

#### 性质

1. $\vdash_{L} (\mathscr{A} \to \mathscr{A})$,where $\mathscr{A}$ is any wf of $L$
2. Deduction theorem: $\Gamma \cup \{\mathscr{A}\} \vdash_{L} \mathscr{B}$ $\Longleftrightarrow$ $\Gamma \vdash_{L} (\mathscr{A}\to \mathscr{B})$
3. (Hypothetical syllogism): $\{(A\to B),(B\to C)\}\vdash_{L} (A\to C)$
4. $\vdash_{L} (\neg \mathscr{B}\to(\mathscr{B}\to \mathscr{A}))$
5. $\vdash_{L} ((\neg \mathscr{A}\to \mathscr{A})\to \mathscr{A})$
6. Every theorem of $L$ is a tautology.
7. $L$ is consistent.
8. An extension $L^*$ of $L$ is consistent if and only if there is a wf. which is not a theorem of $L^*$.
9. 设$L^*$是$L$的一致扩张，$\mathscr{A}$是$L$的一个 wf.，且$\mathscr{A}$不是$L^*$的定理，则向$L^*$中添加$\neg \mathscr{A}$作为公理，所得的扩张$L^{**}$也是一致的。
10. Let $L^*$ be an extension of $L$. Then there is a consistent complete extension of $L^*$
11. If $L^*$ is a consistent extension of $L$ then there is a valuation in which each theorem of $L^*$ is true.
12. (The Adequacy Theorem for $L$): If $\mathscr{A}$ is a wf. of $L$ and $\mathscr{A}$ is a tautology, then $\mathscr{A}$ is a theorem of $L$.
